Welcome back.
And in this lesson I'm going to show you why javascript is truly amazing because with arrays we also
have the ability which is built in to modify these arrays.
So I've kept my animals array because I just love having an array full of bunch of animals that we can
utilize and make use of.
Within this lesson.
So now that I've got my array I've got my five items in my array.
I can add new information into the survey by doing a push.
So this is.
So in order to push so we specify animals and then we use the method push.
So specify the array name and then we use the method push.
This is built in method within Javascript.
So we want to add another item into this array.
So it's odd in sheep.
And then next let's console log what the animals are raised and we'll take a look at and see what actually
happened to it.
So refresh and we see that sheep got added in there at the end.
So Porsche gives you the ability to add item at the end of an array.
So next we can also remove that item from the end of that array.
So this is another builtin method in Javascript.
And we again we need to specify the arrays so we've got animals is there a way that we want to use.
At this time we want to do is we want to use PAUP and we don't have to pass a value in there.
And basically what Pop do will remove the last item from and of an array.
So let's go here and refresh it and we see that array is back to what originally was.
We also have some additional methods that are really cool and and provide us quite a bit of stuff that
we can do within our arrays.
And this is why developers love using arrays in javascript so it gives you so much more power than just
having it directly as a variable.
So we can have these collections of items.
So if we wanted to remove the item in the first item so let's say we want to take cat out of our tree
we can use the shift method.
So this will remove move first item and then I'm going to keep saying in the array.
So let's refresh it.
And now we see that cap is gone.
We can also add an item back in there.
So instead of shift it's going to be on shift and this one much like whenever we're adding anything
we need to specify what we want to add in.
So let's add in another animal here.
So instead of our cat we've taken the cat we've added in a horse let's go and refresh it and we can
see that this way we can add items in the first and first item 2 or three.
That gives us the ability to add that first item into the array.
We can also splice.
So we can remove items depending on what their index value is.
And much like what we did with the prompt method.
We can also assign variables to this.
So basically what happens is that it's so similar to if I wanted to remove another item from animals
so I'll just do that within the console and I'll show you what our response is.
So we'll just plop.
And this is moving the last item and we see that when we remove that last item our response is the value
of the last item.
So we can set a variable and we can have it remove one and then over here we can console like and we
can actually log what was removed because we're able to pick that information up just as we did with
the prompt.
So we see that sheep was actually removed.
So every time we remove something we can actually place that within our within a variable or we can
even place it in an array if we want to do that as well.
So another thing that we want to do is we have the ability to actually to splice.
So we can specify a position and how many items we want to remove.
So animals and let's you splice this time.
So this one is a little bit tricky because it's actually going to take two arguments in there.
So the first one is the position of the items with the index value.
So let's let's take right here let's take rabbit and bird so we know that 0 1 2.
So let's start at two and we'll remove have two items and we see that now we've taken out rabbit and
Bird and now for list listo animals.
That one's gone.
So we've essentially if we had set a variable we would have actually created an array with the items
that were moving using splice.
So splice is really useful as well because it gives us this ability to pull back more than one item
out of the array and be really specific with what we want to select and what we want to remove.
So animals splice first argument is that index position the position of the item that we want to remove.
So we went with two.
And in this instance let's just remove one item.
So we're going to essentially be removing a rabbit out of the array and remove from position number
of items.
So just put that good here and refresh it and we can see that we took Robert out of our array.
So couple other methods that I didn't want to mention we also have the ability to take animals and we
can reverse them.
So by using the reverse method.
And basically this reverses order reverses the order of items.
So now let's take a closer look and we can see that Fish's first bird and its reverse items and we can
also do animals sort.
So this is a useful method.
And basically this gives us the ability to sort items by value.
So basically it will alphabetically sort all of the items within the array.
So you've got bird dog fish horse.
And if we had some numbers in there they actually go for the before the characters so numbers would
come in first.
So what I want you to do now is I've got a challenge for you and what I want you to do is to take an
array.
And I want you to sort it but in reverse alphabetical order.
So whatever and I'm going to add in zebra into this as well so that we have something starting with
Z.
So basically the way that I want it sorted is zebra rabbit fish dog cat bird.
So let's let's pause the video here and see if you can sort this array in a reverse sort order.
So you had the opportunity to try this out and really this is going to be something that we've already
done down here where we're taking this animals are race so what I'm going to do is I'm just going to
bring this one back down here and I'm going to commentate all of this content here.
So that's not interfering with what we're looking at now for this particular challenge.
So the challenge was to take that array to sort it in reverse order and really it's as simple as just
making those commands in the right order.
So first we sort then we reverse and that should give us the value
in reverse.
So let's see.
So we get zebra rabbit fish dog cat bird.
So that was relatively easy.
And there's another trick that I want to show you as well.
So what I'll do is I just comment these ones out and you can actually take this and you can chain these
methods together.
So if you want to assert first was sort that we want to reverse.
And if I go back out here and refresh it we see that we get that same effect.
So you can actually chain them together.
You don't necessarily need to have them on separate lines or separate statements.
You can bring them together and make it a lot more neater when you're outputting your code.
So another one that I want to show you before we finish off this lesson and that's going to be Phil.
So Phil is a really powerful one and we saw earlier that if I take my array.
And so I'm going to comment.
Got one as well.
And we saw earlier that if we take the array and if I do animals and if I do something like 20 and then
I had another animal here.
So I'm going to go back to horse saying I'm running out of animals here.
So if I go back to here and if we print out the array We've got 21 items in there and we've got a bunch
of undefine there so we've got a bunch of undefined values that are sitting there within that array.
So this is where Phil can be used and we can actually fill in the missing items in the array.
So now that we've set the length to 21 I can take animals and I can use Phil and Phil is pretty powerful
because it gives you the ability to fill all of those empty items.
So I know that I've got a couple options here a parameter so I can enter in.
The first thing that we need to enter in is the value.
So if we've got a mouse and next we can enter in a starting position.
So starting index we've got 1 0 1 2 3 4 5.
So let's start at position number 6 and then we can leave it at 6 and I'll show you what actually happens
now.
So we see that instead of leaving them all blank it fills in all of those values with mouse all the
way till the end.
I can also specify an ending index value.
So I have another option here and I can do something like 20 and refresh it.
And we see that it goes all the way to item number 20 which is.
And then it stops there.
So it fills all of those in with mouse but it stops before it hits that last one which is the horse.
So I could also do something like animals length and we could refresh it and we can see that this time
because the length is 21 it's going to go all the way to 21.
So I could also subtract one off of the length to make it a little bit more dynamic cute refreshed again
and we can see that that way we made it more dynamic.
So I do have another really quick challenge for you.
And this is going to be trying to make this value of 6 dynamic and plus the video and I'll show you
how to set that value and let me show you what the solution is.
So the solution is to set a start start slow start value.
And here is where we can use this value of animals length minus one.
And this gives us a value of so you can cancel like that out so we can actually see what that start
for you is
and then let's replace 6 with that start value and go back to refresh the page.
So we've got our start value of 5.
So we know that we don't need to subtract the one off our start value.
So just leave it.
Animals length.
Refresh it.
And this time we got six so we're correct.
We're able to start at zebra and we're able to add filler all the way to the horse.
So the next lesson we're going to be working with all of these different built in methods and I'm going
to be issuing you a challenge to take a starting array value and provide the array value that I'm going
to be showing you.
So that's coming up in the next lesson.